feat(docs-site): add scenario and explanation for contestable rollup (#18530)
taikoxyz/taiko-mono: packages/docs-site/src/content/docs/core-concepts/contestable-rollups.md

description: Core concept page for "Contestable rollups".
---

## Based Contestable Rollup

In based rollups, block building is permissionless. But permissionless block building comes at a cost, in the form of permissionless attacks to the chain if there is a vulnerability in the Taiko codebase. Centralized rollups can tolerate these risks due to their centralized nature, but Taiko cannot as fully decentralized design. Therefore, Taiko needs a robust multi-proof structure to prevent malicious behaviours.

Taiko is configured as a based contestable rollup (BCR). This means that there is a hierarchy of proofs in Taiko and it's permissionless to contest all tiers of proofs. Currently Taiko has SGX as a TEE proof, RiscO(RiscZero) and SP1(Succinct) as ZK proofs, Guardian (multi-sig) proof which is owned by Taiko Labs. Guardian proof is not contestable and we plan to phase out after the next protocol hard fork.

![Proof Tiers](~/assets/content/docs/core-concepts/proof-tiers.png)

**Scenario:**

> The process begins when a proposer submits a new block, followed by a tier-1 (SGX) prover who submits a proof with a TAIKO bond. During the 24-hour cooldown period, anyone can contest this proof by posting their own bond, as demonstrated by Cindy.

Reviewer: Right now the mainnet sgx cooldown period is less than 24hrs?

> The process begins when a proposer submits a new block, followed by a tier-1 (SGX) prover who submits a proof with a TAIKO bond. During the 24-hour cooldown period, anyone can contest this proof by posting their own bond, as demonstrated by Cindy.

Author: ```suggestion
The process begins when a proposer submits a new block, followed by a tier-1 (SGX) prover who submits a proof with a TAIKO bond. During the 240-minute cooldown period, anyone can contest this proof by posting their own bond, as demonstrated by Cindy.
```

> The process begins when a proposer submits a new block, followed by a tier-1 (SGX) prover who submits a proof with a TAIKO bond. During the 240-minute cooldown period, anyone can contest this proof by posting their own bond, as demonstrated by Cindy.

Author: ```suggestion
The process begins when a proposer submits a new block, followed by a tier-1 (SGX) prover who submits a proof with a TAIKO bond. During the 4 hour cooldown period, anyone can contest this proof by posting their own bond, as demonstrated by Cindy.
```
